ॐ गुरुर् ब्रह्मा गुरुर् विष्णुः गुरुर् देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात् परं ब्रह्म तस्मै श्री गुरवे नमः ॥

गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भव रोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यनाम् दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥

अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्यां नमः ॥
So far we have seen the meaning for two Panchadis.
In the last Panchadi we addressed the waters, we praised them and addressed their glories.
Now in the third Panchadi we are going to pray to them to remove some other obstacles and unfavorable conditions so that we can continue with our Yagya.

Let us first chant the third Panchadi, then we will see the meaning line by line.

अ॒पाश्न्यु॑ष्णि-म॒पा रक्षः॑ । अ॒पाश्न्यु॑ष्णि-म॒पा रघ᳚म् । 
अपा᳚घ्रा॒मप॑ चा॒वर्ति᳚म् । अप॑ दे॒वीरि॒तो हि॑त । 
वज्र॑-न्दे॒वीरजी॑ताग्​श्च । भुव॑न-न्देव॒सूव॑रीः । 
आ॒दि॒त्यानदि॑ति-न्दे॒वीम् । योनि॑नोर्ध्व-मु॒दीष॑त । 
शि॒वा न॒-श्शन्त॑मा भवन्तु । दि॒व्या आप॒ ओष॑धयः । 
सु॒मृ॒डी॒का सर॑स्वति । मा ते॒ व्यो॑म स॒न्दृशि॑ ॥ 3 ॥

Let’s look at the first mantra or the line “अ॒पाश्न्यु॑ष्णि-म॒पा रक्षः॑”.
So “Apa Asnyushnim Apa Rakshah”.
This is the Avyayam.

But we have to take the “Hita” in the fourth mantra or the fourth line and then take it together with “Apa”.
So “Apahita”, which means drive, drive away, remove.
“Apahita Asnyushnim”.

“Asnyushnim” means the Agni which burns or consumes everything that it comes in contact with.
So Swami Omkaranandaji says this is the Agni that destroys objects of pleasure, Bhogya Vastu.
So what could be the Bhogya Vastu for somebody who is doing a Yagya in the Aranyam, right?

So this could, obviously, could be one such thing, could be the hut or the place where we do this Yagya.
So we are praying to the waters that remove that Agni which could cause damage or destroy the place where I am.
An accidental fire could just burn the entire hut or anything, a Mandapa where the Yagya Shala is there.

So we are asking: drive away that Agni, drive away or drive over that unfavorable condition so that it doesn’t exist.
That’s what we are asking here: “Apahita Asnyushnim”.
Then again “Apa Rakshah”.

Again we have to take the “Hita” from the fourth mantra: “Apahita”, remove.
“Rakshah” literally means protecting, but here it means remove the destructive spirit or the demons.
So the Rakshasas, that’s what it means, literally Rakshah, from who? Rakshasas, that’s what it is here.

So remove the demonic forces from this place where I am doing the worship.
So “Apahita Rakshah” means remove those demonic or destructive spirit from the place.
So this line or this mantra “Apashnishni maparakshah” means: O waters, please remove the heat that destroys objects of pleasure, let it not burn the place where I am, where I am doing this Yagya, remove the demons or Rakshasas so that we can focus on the Yagyam.

“Apashnishni maparakam”.
Again “Apa Asnyushnim Apa Ragam”.
That’s how the Anvayam, Anvayam for this line is: “Apahita”, remove, “Asnyushnim”, same thing here repeating from the first line, first mantra, again the Agni here.

But Swami Omkaranandaji says this is the Agni that is inside us.
The one first time we saw was outside, the Agni that can cause damage outside, but this is the Agni that is inside.
The Agni inside helps with digestion, it helps with keeping our body temperature, all those things, right?

So that Agni could cause a Jwaram or fever in us too.
So we are asking the waters: let that Agni not cause, or if it is the cause of fever, the Agni that could cause the fever, remove that Agni from me so that, you know, let it be peaceful, let it be Shanti, Shanti to me, let it bless me with peace, let it not disturb me.
That’s what we are asking; this Asnyushnim is the internal Agni, we are praying that to be removed so that it doesn’t cause any harm to us.

Now again “Apahita Ragam”.
“Apahita”, remove; “Ragam” means Papam or diseases, Rogam, for example.
So remove any diseases and their causes too, remove that also from us.

So, O waters, please remove the heat that causes Jwaram, fever, in the body and remove any diseases or the Papas and the causes as well.
That’s what we are asking here.

“अपा᳚घ्रा॒मप॑ चा॒वर्ति᳚म् । ”.
“Apa Apahita Agram Agram Agram Apa Cha Avartim”.
So “Apahita” again, remove; “Agram”.

“Agram” here, it basically means the Indriya Shakti of the nose, the smelling; but “Gra” means that, but “Agra”, Agram is the opposite, which is deficiency, not able to.
So through the nose, here we are asking all the Gyanendriyas, let them all have their Shakti, let there not be any deficiency, shortage in our Gyanendriyas like grasping powers or listening, any of those things, let there not be any deficiency.
So “Apahita Agram”.

Then “Apahita Cha” also “Avartim”.
“Avartim” means poverty, Daridram.
So it is asking: remove the poverty from me; poverty here is shortage of Dravyam that we could use in the Yagya, and we need Dravyam, right?

So could be that, and also enough food for us to be able to do the Yagya healthily, right?
So any kind of shortages or poverty, please remove that as well.

“Apatevi Rito Hita”.
So now we have been asking one by one, like the Agni that outside could damage outside Vastu in the first mantra, we asked that, and also we asked for removing all the Rakshasa or the bad elements or bad forces, then we asked for the Papas to be removed and the Agni inside us that could harm us, removing that.

Instead of enumerating one by one, here it is saying: O Devi, O waters, Devi, O goddesses, Jalabhimani Devatas, “Apahita”, remove; “Ita” from here, Ita from here, remove everything from here, all the Sarva, Sarvam Arishtam, remove all the bad things, sorrows from this place where I am doing this Yagya, please remove everything.
That’s what the last mantra is asking.

So looking at those four mantras or four lines together, we are asking, praying to the waters: O Jalabhimani Devatas, please remove or drive away the Agni that can destroy the place of worship or the Yagya Shala, or that can cause harm to me or us like Jwaram, fever, etc.
We are also asking those waters, please also remove the bad forces, Rakshasas, Papas, Ragam, poverty, Avartim and all such negative forces from this place.
That’s what these four mantras mean.

The next mantras we will see in the next recording.
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात् पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥

ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ।
हरिः ॐ ।
श्रीगुरुभ्यो नमः ।
हरिः ॐ ॥